MIR move elimination (#3943)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-mir-move-elimination.md

let yaddr = &raw const y;
x = String::new(); // assuming this does not change the address of x
// x and y are both live here. Therefore, they can't have the same address.
assume(xaddr != yaddr);
drop(x);
drop(y);
```
    
```rust
// This program has UB
let x = String::new();
let xaddr = &raw const x;
let y = x; // Move out of x and de-initialize it.
let yaddr = &raw const y;
// So far, there has been no constraint that would force the addresses to be different.
// Therefore we can demonically choose them to be the same. Therefore, this is UB.
assume(xaddr != yaddr);
// If the addresses are the same, this next line triggers NB. But actually this next
// line is unreachable in that case because we already got UB above...
x = String::new();
// x and y are both live here.
drop(x);
drop(y);
```
    
</details>

### Partial moves

The proposed behavior of freeing a local variable's allocation on move only applies when the entire variable is moved. This is not the case when only a part of the variable is moved (e.g. only one field of a struct) because a re-initialized field must retain the address it had before, reintroducing the same NB issue.

> Even in the case where all of the fields of a local variable have been moved out one-by-one, the local will not be freed.

Reviewer: > Even in the case where all of the fields of a local variable have been moved out one-by-one, the local will not be freed.

Why not?

> With that said, we would like to keep the door open for potentially switching to operational semantics with NB in the future. So although the proposed opsem does not consider accessing a moved field as UB, we would like users to avoid relying on this behavior since it may change in the future.

Reviewer: Why can't we say that accessing the moved field is UB? Because we don't have NB, the compiler can't *exploit* that UB by stashing another allocation with an observable address in the empty space. But that doesn't mean it can't still be UB detected by Miri, if we want users to avoid relying on it. And the compiler could even make use of the UB, to stash an allocation whose address it can prove is never observed.

Author: There's no reason we can't do it, it's just that I am not doing so in this RFC and instead leaving to future work (I will update the future possibilities section with this). There are 2 main reasons for this:

1. Adding support for partial moves makes the opsem (and by extension Miri) much more complex since we now needs to track which bytes of a local have been moved out and become "inactive" (UB to access). What happens to the padding of a struct if one field is moved out? What happens to the discriminant of an enum like `Option<T>` if the `Some` value has been moved out and the layout is optimized (the discriminant occupied the same bytes as the value)? These are all questions that would have to be answered.

2. The proposed MIR optimization pass can't easily take advantage of this, and even if it could (while respecting address observation rules) then I expect the benefit over the existing proposed pass would be minimal. It's just not worth the extra complexity of tracking lifetimes separately for every field of a local.

    - This takes local unification into account so that if a local is de-allocated and then re-allocated within the same statement, no `StorageLive`/`StorageDead` is emitted.
    - This may involve inserting such statements on block edges, which requires critical edges to be split beforehand.
- Call arguments are promoted to `byref` where possible.
    - `byval copy` call arguments are promoted to `byval move` if they do not have `Deref` projections and the underlying local is known to be dead afterwards. This happens at kill points if the address of a local has not been taken.
    - `byval move` call arguments with an unprojected local[^7] are promoted to `byref` arguments if they do not overlap with any other `byref` argument or the return place of the call. This can easily be checked by looking at whether any of those other places use the same local as a root.

[^7]: This promotion is only legal when moving an unprojected local because partial moves don't free the allocation. There is therefore no opsem which would allow the same address to be observed in both the callee and the caller.

## Drawbacks

> ### `Copy` is no longer "free"

Reviewer 2: This makes it sound as though types with `Copy` would be less efficient than with the status quo, but as far as I understand this is not the case. `Copy` types would at worst be as efficient as with the status quo.

This sounds more like a limitation (AKA an opportunity for future work) than a drawback.

It's also not clear to me why the mere act of implementing `Copy` for a type would inhibit the optimization in practice. Surely code that was originally written for a non-`Copy` type would have an access pattern where every copy could be optimized into a move?

Author: > This makes it sound as though types with `Copy` would be less efficient than with the status quo, but as far as I understand this is not the case. `Copy` types would at worst be as efficient as with the status quo.

That is correct.
 
> This sounds more like a limitation (AKA an opportunity for future work) than a drawback.

Sure, I can move this to the future work section.

> It's also not clear to me why the mere act of implementing `Copy` for a type would inhibit the optimization in practice. Surely code that was originally written for a non-`Copy` type would have a copy pattern where every copy could be optimized into a move?

It inhibits the optimization *if the value has been borrowed*. A move invalidates borrows whereas a copy doesn't. I've update the text with an example.

[^8]: [rust-lang/rust#146383](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/146383)

This constraint will have to be removed for this proposal to be implemented since there will no longer be any guarantee that 2 locals don't share the same address. The impact on codegen can be mitigated by applying some basic alias analysis: the extra intermediate allocation in codegen isn't needed if the source or destination is a local whose address hasn't been taken.

### MIR optimizations

MIR optimizations need to be careful not to shorten the live range of a local by moving or eliminating assignments or moves. Doing so could cause the lifetime analysis to conclude that 2 locals could share the same address when this would not be allowed in the source program. Note that this restriction only applies to locals whose address has been taken. Extending the live range of a local is not a problem since it just pessimizes the optimization by forcing locals to have separate addresses.

In practice this is usually not a problem because most MIR optimizations will avoid touching locals whose address has been taken.

> In cases where an initializing assignment needs to be moved down, a placeholder assignment `_dest = undef` can be left in the place of the old one. This doesn't emit any machine code, but has the effect of activating the destination local without writing anything into it, thus ensuring its live range matches the one specified in the original program.

Reviewer 3: What does `_dest = undef` actually mean in MIR?  There's no `undef` in MIR that way, in general, because the local is typed so if `_1` is an `i32`, you can't do `_1 = MaybeUninit::uninit();`.  Is this a new construct?

Author: You're right, this doesn't actually make sense. I will remove that paragraph.

- Feature Name: N/A
- Start Date: 2026-04-01
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

## Summary

This RFC proposes changes to Rust's operational semantics and MIR representation to enable elimination of unnecessary copies of local variables. Specifically, it makes accessing memory after a move undefined behavior, and redefines the allocation lifetime of local variables to be tied to their initialized state rather than their lexical scope. Finally, it introduces a new MIR optimization pass which exploits these guarantees to eliminate copies between locals when it is safe to do so.

## Motivation

> Consider the following idiomatic Rust code which constructs an outer object containing an inner object.

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't call code that involves an `init(&mut self)` "idiomatic" Rust. We generally try to avoid that and construct objects directly in their proper state whenever possible.

## Status quo

```rust=
struct Foo([u8; 100]);

unsafe extern "C" {
    safe fn observe(b: *mut Foo);
    safe fn foo() -> Foo;
}

pub fn example() {
    let mut a = foo();
    observe(&raw mut a);
    let mut b = a;
    observe(&raw mut b);
}
```

<details>
    
<summary>MIR</summary>

```
fn example() -> () {
    let mut _0: ();
    let mut _1: Foo;
    let _2: ();
    let mut _3: *mut Foo;
    let _5: ();
    let mut _6: *mut Foo;
    scope 1 {
        debug a => _1;
        let mut _4: Foo;
        scope 2 {
            debug b => _4;
        }
    }

    bb0: {
        StorageLive(_1);
        _1 = foo() -> [return: bb1, unwind unreachable];
    }

    bb1: {
        StorageLive(_3);
        _3 = &raw mut _1;
        _2 = observe(move _3) -> [return: bb2, unwind unreachable];
    }

    bb2: {
        StorageDead(_3);
        StorageLive(_4);
        _4 = move _1;
        StorageLive(_6);
        _6 = &raw mut _4;
        _5 = observe(move _6) -> [return: bb3, unwind unreachable];
    }

    bb3: {
        StorageDead(_6);
        StorageDead(_4);
        StorageDead(_1);
        return;
    }
}
```

</details>

> To understand why rustc is unable to perform move optimization, we need to look at the generated MIR in detail. In this example we would like the move on line 11 to be eliminated. This is only possible if `a` and `b` have the same address, which would turn the assignment into a no-op.

Reviewer 4: This doesn't show line numbers on github. Please add a comment in the code indicating which line is line 11.

Fundamentally, the language needs to be changed to allow `a` and `b` to share the same address in this example and eliminate the copy. Specifically, accessing memory that has been moved must become UB.

## Proposed language changes

This section describes the surface language changes to enable move optimization.

### Local allocation lifetimes

Currently, the lifetime of a local variable in a function starts from the point where it is defined (usually a `let` statement) and ends when execution exits its scope[^0]. During this lifetime, a variable has an associated *allocation* and address, which prevents any other allocation from having the same address. This lifetime is purely scope-based and independent of control flow.

[^0]: To be clear, this is what the compiler does today. The language spec is entirely silent on this matter.

This RFC proposes to instead only have the allocations of variables be live while they are *initialized*. This means that the underlying memory for variables is:
- allocated at the point where it is initialized (instead of where it is declared).
- freed when a variable of a non-`Copy` type is *moved* (or at the end of its scope, whichever is first).

> This notably adds a new form of UB: accessing (read or write) a variable after it has been moved is no longer allowed since the allocation has been freed.

Reviewer 4: This does not sound like a new form of UB to me. How is this different from accessing the variable after it has been freed (because of StorageDead or because the stack frame got popped)?

This gets a bit more clear later, I assume you mean that place expression evaluation raises UB when evaluating a local variable that's currently "live", similar to what it already does for local variables that are "dead". But at this point in the RFC this is confusing.

Author: I've clarified the wording.

- They are lowered to [`llvm.lifetime.start`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#int-lifestart) and [`llvm.lifetime.end`](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-lifetime-end-intrinsic) intrinsics which are used by LLVM for stack slot coloring, which reduces stack usage.
- `StorageDead` is also used by the borrow checker to ensure that any borrows do not outlive the underlying allocation.

This RFC proposes to change MIR to make the lifetime of a local implicitly defined as the point where it is initialized to the point where its contents are moved out. This involves reworking the semantics of `StorageLive` and `StorageDead`. This has previously been proposed in [this issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/68622), but the idea is further expanded here.

The `StorageLive` and `StorageDead` are still kept as separate statements in MIR for 2 reasons:
1. They indicate where codegen should insert LLVM lifetime intrinsics.
2. `StorageDead` marks the end of the scope in which a local is defined, which ends any borrows of that local.

#### Initialization

> `StorageLive` no longer allocates the underlying memory for a local. Instead, any MIR statement or terminator which writes to a place that has no `Deref` projections[^2] will implicitly allocate the storage for that local[^3] before writing to it. This has no effect if the storage for that local is already allocated[^4].

Reviewer 4: To make it sound to generate LLVM lifetime markers from `StorageLive`, we will need to do *something* in the opsem for `StorageLive`.

Reading on, you clarify this later, but the order in which you explain this is confusing.

Author: I've kept the original ordering since for most people it's better to give an overview of the intended semantics first before diving into a more formal specification for StorageDead/StorageLive. However I have added a link to that in the section intro.

[^3]: If the local was previously freed by `StorageDead` or a move, this new allocation may have a different address than the previous one.
[^4]: This is intentionally different from the old behavior of `StorageLive` which will free the old allocation and create a new one if a local is already allocated. This new behavior is necessary to correctly handle control flows where a local is only allocated in one branch but not the other.

#### De-initialization

The effects of `StorageDead` are now implicitly performed when a local is moved as a MIR operand. This will de-allocate the storage for the local, allowing its address to be re-used by a later allocation. Any use of the local, even taking its address, is UB if the local is unallocated.

The separate `StorageDead` statement is still necessary to mark the end of the scope in which a local is defined. However, it has no effect if the local has already been freed.

`move` operands only have the effect of de-allocating the storage of a local when used with a bare, unprojected local. If the local has projections then `move` behaves identically to `copy`.

> #### New semantics of `StorageLive` and `StorageDead`

Reviewer 4: This RFC also inevitable deeply changes the semantics of assignments. There should be a section on that.

And this section is where I have the biggest disagreement with the RFC: the RFC proposes to make (de)allocation of locals an *implicit* side-effect of (some) place/value expressions. I think that's a problem for multiple reasons
- It breaks the property that expression evaluation can be arbitrarily reordered with each other, making it harder to reason about MIR.
- For places it's not even clear how evaluation should work. I can make guesses but the RFC is not very clear about it. (EDIT: This one is answered by the [MiniRust patch](https://github.com/minirust/minirust/commit/90e085552cb8228e499e073669512fb87181ab7b).)

I would propose that instead the (de)allocation happens as part of the *assignment* operator. The way I think about it is that the operator performs the following steps:
- evaluate the value expression (RHS)
- deallocate a set of locals
- allocate a set of locals
- evaluate the place expression (LHS)
- store the value into the place

In MiniRust, it's probably easiest to just annotate those two sets of locals as part of the syntax of assignment itself. In MIR, we might want to make that implicit. That would then be able to capture the syntactic ruls you have proposed elsewhere:
- for the locals to deallocate: if the RHS is `Use(Move(local))`, then `local` is deallocated, otherwise nothing gets deallocated. (Or is it really all `Move(local)` operands on the RHS? I can see it being useful for aggregate initialization but I doubt this makes much sense for binops.)
- for the locals to allocate: if the LHS is `local.non-deref-projs`, then `local` gets allocated, otherwise nothing gets allocated

Author: As per our discussion on Zulip, I've kept the existing semantics of doing allocation/de-allocation as part of destination place/input operand evaluation. I've added bulk allocation/deallocation as an alternative option, but in the end both options are workable for MIR optimizations, the only difference is in how they are handled in Miri/MiniRust.

> #### New semantics of `StorageLive` and `StorageDead`

Reviewer 4: The goal of these semantics is to ensure that the regions between StorageLive and StorageDead are an overapproximation of the actual time the variable is allocated and can hold data -- right?  That's required for LLVM codegen to be correct. This would be worth saying explicitly.

> Although `StorageLive` and `StorageDead` no longer directly allocate memory for a local and only serve as an indicator of where to insert LLVM lifetime intrinsics, we still need to specify their behavior in MIR to determine where it is valid to place them. To do this we add a phantom "live" state, in which a local exists but does not yet have an allocation. Locals are always in one of three states: **dead**, **live**, and **initialized**.

Reviewer 4: I think we need to bikeshed these names a bit. "initialized" is confusing since we have to move to that state even when just one field of the local is initialized, so I'd propose renaming it to "allocated".

And "live" is confusing because typically we call a variable live the entire time until its last use, but most of that time it will be in the "initialized"/"allocated" state. Unfortunately I don't have a good idea for a better name here.

Author: I've renamed "initialized" to "allocated" but just like you, I can't think of a better name for "live".

State transitions are defined as follows:

| Use of local | Precondition | Postcondition |
|---|---|---|
| Function entry (arguments) | N/A | State starts as **initialized** |
| Function entry (return place) | N/A | State starts as **live**[^ret] |
| Function entry (other locals) | N/A | State starts as **dead** |
| `StorageLive` | None | State becomes **live**[^live] |
| `StorageDead` | None | State becomes **dead** |
| Destination place with no `Deref` projection | UB if **dead** | State becomes **initialized** |

> | Move operand with no projections | UB if not **initialized** | State becomes **live**[^live2] |

Reviewer 4: This defines semantics in terms of *place expressions*, but we actually define it in terms of *places* (i.e., the result of evaluating a place expression). And the way you set things up, one cannot even evaluate the place expression when the local is dead, as the result of evaluating a place expression is a pointer to the memory that backs the place.

IOW, I have a hard time figuring out the intended MIR semantics for place and value expressions based on what you write.

Reviewer 4: Having now read your MiniRust patch, it seems the intent is that there is an "evaluation mode" for places that decides whether a live local will be allocated during place evaluation or whether that is UB. That answers my question (though I am not yet sure whether I like it), but it'd still help to restructure the text to make this more clear.

Author: I've clarified the wording to make it clear that evaluation of a place expression either produces an address or UB, and that implicit allocation happens as part of place evaluation.

[^10]: Arguably this was already the case before since projections that read from memory have side effects in the memory model (Stack/tree borrows).

### MIR call terminators

MIR currently treats `copy` and `move` operands identically (meaning a `move` is the same as a `copy`) except in the context of function arguments in a `Call` terminator[^5]. There, `move` has a special meaning: rather than copying the operand value to a new place in the callee, the place is temporarily "donated" to the callee so that the corresponding argument local in the callee may have the same address as the argument place in the caller[^6]. It is non-deterministic whether the argument in the callee re-uses the existing place or uses a new allocation, and in practice this depends on whether the calling convention passes the argument by value or by reference (which is only known post-monomorphization).

[^5]: [rust-lang/rust#71117](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/71117)
[^6]: The exact behavior is still an open question today (which this RFC specifies), but this describes what codegen currently does.

> Because this RFC assigns new semantics to `move` operands, a different way is needed to indicate whether a call argument place may be re-used by a callee. This RFC proposes to represent an argument to a MIR function call as a `CallArg`:

Reviewer 4: Is it? This RFC's semantics only seem to apply for assignments. At least, they are described in a way that I cannot make sense of them any other way. For a function call, we often need to know the return place (i.e. its address) before the function gets invoked (because we literally pass it in as a pointer), so most of what you say doesn't apply I think.

Reviewer 4: Looking at the MiniRust patch, it seems like the idea is that in `x = foo(move y)`, `x` and `y` could use the same storage: before the call, `y` gets read, then deallocated, and then `x` gets allocated. I see.

That would mean "in-place argument passing" and "move (deinit local)" are actually mutually exclusive, right?

Author: I've removed all the parts related to call argument handling: they're not relevant to the optimization.

    - `byval move` call arguments with an unprojected local[^7] are promoted to `byref` arguments if they do not overlap with any other `byref` argument or the return place of the call. This can easily be checked by looking at whether any of those other places use the same local as a root.

[^7]: This promotion is only legal when moving an unprojected local because partial moves don't free the allocation. There is therefore no opsem which would allow the same address to be observed in both the callee and the caller.

## Drawbacks

### Src/dest aliasing in assignments

MIR assignments currently have the constraint that, for types which are not treated as scalars, the source and destination places are [not allowed to overlap](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/68364). This constraint exists to make codegen easier since such assignments can be lowered to a `memcpy` call. Not having this constraint would require codegen to insert an intermediate allocation to handle cases such as `_1 = (_1.1, _1.0)` where the source and destination may alias.

> This kind of MIR does not arise directly from MIR lowering, and MIR optimizations often have to do extra work to avoid generating invalid MIR. This has in the past led to at least one bug in MIR optimizations[^8].

Reviewer 4: This flows strangely, making it hard to follow.
```suggestion
This kind of MIR does not arise directly from MIR lowering. However, it can arise during optimizations. In fact, MIR optimizations often have to do extra work to avoid generating such invalid MIR. This has in the past led to at least one bug in MIR optimizations[^8].
```
I assume that's what you mean?

> [^8]: [rust-lang/rust#146383](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/146383)

Reviewer 4: You can also link to https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/141038 and https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/141313. This causes MIR unsoundnesses al the time.

Though that could be resolved by adding a flag on the `Assign` statement saying whether it's non-overlapping or not.

Author: I've removed the section on aliasing: it turns out we don't need to change the existing MIR/codegen restrictions on aliasing, a fixup pass after move elimination can handle this.

Fundamentally, the language needs to be changed to allow `a` and `b` to share the same address in this example and eliminate the copy. Specifically, accessing memory that has been moved must become UB.

## Proposed language changes

This section describes the surface language changes to enable move optimization.

### Local allocation lifetimes

Currently, the lifetime of a local variable in a function starts from the point where it is defined (usually a `let` statement) and ends when execution exits its scope[^0]. During this lifetime, a variable has an associated *allocation* and address, which prevents any other allocation from having the same address. This lifetime is purely scope-based and independent of control flow.

[^0]: To be clear, this is what the compiler does today. The language spec is entirely silent on this matter.

This RFC proposes to instead only have the allocations of variables be live while they are *initialized*. This means that the underlying memory for variables is:
- allocated at the point where it is initialized (instead of where it is declared).

> - freed when a variable of a non-`Copy` type is *moved* (or at the end of its scope, whichever is first).

Reviewer 5: How does this work with unwinding (which causes multiple variables to be deallocated "at the same time") from a scope with variables that don't have destructors? See https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/147875

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3943/0e48109adfed62d42f4ac8f1367f08aabaa4fa96..3c4e207fb6b3a350fdf6a0b8f9197b5c16bb5f1b)*

Author: It just works? The lifetime of a local on the unwind path ends either at StorageDead or at an UnwindResume/UnwindTerminate terminator.

This RFC proposes to change MIR to make the lifetime of a local implicitly defined as the point where it is initialized to the point where its contents are moved out. This involves reworking the semantics of `StorageLive` and `StorageDead`. This has previously been proposed in [this issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/68622), but the idea is further expanded here.

The `StorageLive` and `StorageDead` are still kept as separate statements in MIR for 2 reasons:
1. They indicate where codegen should insert LLVM lifetime intrinsics.
2. `StorageDead` marks the end of the scope in which a local is defined, which ends any borrows of that local.

The precise semantics of `StorageLive` and `StorageDead` are re-defined in a section [below](#precise-semantics-for-local-lifetimes).

#### Initialization

`StorageLive` no longer allocates the underlying memory for a local. Instead, any MIR statement or terminator which writes to a place that has no `Deref` projections[^2] will implicitly allocate the storage for that local[^3] before writing to it. This has no effect if the storage for that local is already allocated[^4].

> Writes to places that *do* have a `Deref` projection will still require that the base local be allocated, otherwise behavior is undefined.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Writes to places that *do* have a `Deref` projection are *reading* the base local of the place expression. They will hence still require that local to be allocated, otherwise behavior is undefined.
```

[^4]: This is intentionally different from the old behavior of `StorageLive` which will free the old allocation and create a new one if a local is already allocated. This new behavior is necessary to correctly handle control flows where a local is only allocated in one branch but not the other.

#### De-initialization

The effects of `StorageDead` are now implicitly performed when a local is moved as a MIR operand. This applies uniformly to any MIR statement or terminator that takes a `move` operand, not just assignments. This will de-allocate the storage for the local, allowing its address to be re-used by a later allocation. Any use of the local, even taking its address, is UB if the local is unallocated.

The separate `StorageDead` statement is still necessary to mark the end of the scope in which a local is defined. However, it has no effect if the local has already been freed.

`move` operands only have the effect of de-allocating the storage of a local when used with a bare, unprojected local. If the local has projections then `move` behaves identically to `copy`.

### MIR evaluation order

> Since `move` operands and writes to destination places now effectively have allocation/deallocation side-effects, it is necessary to precisely define the order in which the side-effects of a MIR statement or terminator occur. The general rule is that operands are evaluated left to right, except for destination places which are always evaluated last. This ordering applies uniformly to every kind of MIR statement and terminator, not just plain assignments. This differs from the current evaluation order in Miri and MiniRust which evaluates the destination place first.

Reviewer 4: I seem to recall some open questions here regarding `Call`?
My implicit assumption is that all operands of the `Call` terminator must be evaluated before the function is actually invoked. So yes, the destination is evaluated last, but it is still evaluated before we push a stack frame.

If we don't do that, things get quite strange -- we'd have to store a *place expression* in the stack frame (in Miri/MiniRust) and delay executing that expression until after the call returns. That's at least very unusual, we don't store any *expressions* in the Abstract Machine state so far. The RFC should be explicit about this, and justify its choice if things are truly delayed until after the call returns.

Author: I used to have an RFC section about changes to Call terminators, but ended up removing it because it wasn't very relevant to the actual optimization. Really, the only relevant evaluation order here is the one for assignment statements.

And yes, call destinations are still evaluated before the call actually happens. The only change is that is now happens after operands are evaluation. This is purely for consistency with assignments, it's not strictly necessary.

Reviewer 4: So call destinations are evaluated before the moved-out locals have their backing memory freed? That seems inconsistent with assignments?

Author: That's just because move operands on calls have a completely different meaning than move operands anywhere else. On calls they mean: "pass in-place and free after the call". Everywhere else they mean "evaluate the value and then free immediately".

Reviewer 4: Indeed they do. Which is why I find it questionable to argue with consistency here.

[^live2]: This frees the allocation since **live** doesn't have an allocation, only **allocated** does. However it can be re-initialized without the need for another `StorageLive`.

### MIR call terminators

MIR currently treats `copy` and `move` operands identically (meaning a `move` is the same as a `copy`) except in the context of function arguments in a `Call` terminator[^5]. There, `move` has a special meaning: rather than copying the operand value to a new place in the callee, the place is temporarily "donated" to the callee so that the corresponding argument local in the callee may have the same address as the argument place in the caller[^6]. It is non-deterministic whether the argument in the callee re-uses the existing place or uses a new allocation, and in practice this depends on whether the calling convention passes the argument by value or by reference (which is only known post-monomorphization).

[^5]: [rust-lang/rust#71117](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/71117)
[^6]: The exact behavior is still an open question today (which this RFC specifies), but this describes what codegen currently does.

> This RFC doesn't change this special meaning of `move` operands in call terminators. Unlike other statements and terminators, move operands of a whole local in call terminators do *not* cause the local to be immediately deallocated. Instead this freeing is deferred until after the call has returned, when the callee has finished using the place.

Reviewer 4: So... the stack frame (in Miri/MiniRust) also needs to remember a list of locals to free after the function returned?

This is an odd special case. The RFC should include some sort of justification for this choice.

Author: Yes, the stack frame needs to remember the list of locals to free after return/unwind. In https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/162048 which implements this RFC in Miri, I added those to `ReturnContinuation`. The reason is consistency with normal move operands: they should result in the local being in the live-but-unallocated state at the end of the statement.

Reviewer 4: I usually don't think of function calls as having anything to do with normal assignments  so I would not expect consistency here. To me the consistent thing would be to have `move` work as always, i.e., have the local in live-but-unalloc state at the end of the *machine step*, i.e., *before* the function gets called.

Author: Since moved locals are passed in-place, the *allocation* backing that local needs to stay live and protected for the duration of the call. In theory we could detach that allocation from the local and eagerly reset the state of the local to live-but-unalloc, but a) this isn't observable outside the frame anyways and b) we still need to defer freeing the local's allocation until after the call returns.

Reviewer 4: >  In theory we could detach that allocation from the local and eagerly reset the state of the local to live-but-unalloc, but a) this isn't observable outside the frame anyways and b) we still need to defer freeing the local's allocation until after the call returns.

Hm, that may actually work quite elegantly if it then means that the callee is responsible for freeing the allocation, i.e., the allocation is basically "handed over" to the callee?

### Phase 1: Liveness computation

A dataflow analysis is run to produce a `SparseIntervalMatrix` recording, for each local, the set of points in the function at which it must have a distinct allocation. Two locals may have the same address if and only if their rows in this matrix are disjoint.

To model the fact that a source operand and a destination place in the same MIR statement may share an address (the source is read before the destination is written), liveness is evaluated at two points per statement: an **early** point at which source operands are read, and a **late** point at which destination places are written. Ranges in the matrix are recorded against these split points, so a local moved out at the early point of a statement does not appear as overlapping with a local written at the late point of the same statement.

A local's live range starts and ends according to the following rules:

- **Starts** at the late point of any statement or terminator that writes to it with a place that has no `Deref` projection.
- **Ends** at the early point of any statement or terminator that:
    - is a `StorageDead` for the local.

>     - is a `Drop` of the whole local.

Reviewer 6: The RFC offers no basis for the special treatment of `Drop`. Is it an omission?

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rfcs/3943/0e48109adfed62d42f4ac8f1367f08aabaa4fa96..3c4e207fb6b3a350fdf6a0b8f9197b5c16bb5f1b)*

Author: You're right, it's not justified by the RFC. I'll remove it.

In #156046 I did try using this to work around the lack of `StorageDead` markers in the unwind path (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/147875), which caused false overlaps in local lifetimes in the unwind path.

- Self-assignments (e.g. `_1 = _1`) are deleted outright.
- Simple `Use` assignments where source and destination overlap but are not identical are split: the source is read into a fresh temporary first, and the temporary is then moved into the destination.
- Aggregate assignments where any operand aliases the destination are decomposed into per-field assignments. Per-field self-assignments (where source and destination resolve to the same place) are deleted outright. Other aliasing fields are hoisted into temporaries first, then all destination fields are written in a second pass. For enum aggregates the discriminant is set after fields are written.
- Other rvalues (e.g. `Repeat`, `Cast`) are hoisted whole into a temporary if any of their operands alias the destination.
- Rvalues that operate only on scalar types (binary/unary ops, `Discriminant`, `Ref`, `RawPtr`, etc.) are left untouched because their codegen does not rely on the no-aliasing assumption.

## Drawbacks

> ### Impact on MIR optimizations

Reviewer 4: MIR optimizations also need to be aware that place/(r)value expressions cannot be freely reordered around each other any more as they can have side-effects.
